Add before-you-begin, notebook templates catalog, Nextflow caching reference (#49)
ASU-RSE-Services/apgap-documentation: content/docs/apgap_ecosystem/notebook-templates/_index.md

+++
title = 'Notebook templates'
weight = 7
date = 2026-08-18
bookCollapseSection = true
+++

# Notebook templates

> APGAP ships seven Jupyter notebooks pre-loaded into every project's Vertex AI Workbench. They cover the common paths a new user takes: getting oriented, reading data, running pipelines, pulling from external repositories, and looking up file formats and tool concepts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
APGAP ships several Jupyter notebooks pre-loaded into every project's Vertex AI Workbench. They cover the common paths a new user takes: getting oriented, reading data, running pipelines, pulling from external repositories, and looking up file formats and tool concepts.
```
Otherwise, we'll have to change this sentence every time someone adds a notebook (which we'll likely forget to do eventually).

Author: Applied. Also swept the sentence at the bottom that had "All seven notebooks".

### `04-download-from-public-repos`

Pulls sequencing data from NCBI's Sequence Read Archive (SRA), its European mirror (ENA), and reference sequences from GenBank via NCBI's Entrez API. Handles the `sra-tools` install with a version pin (older builds fail TLS handshake against modern NCBI). Cross-checks that SRA and ENA copies of the same accession agree on the underlying reads. They do, though the FASTQ header conventions differ.

**Prereqs:** nb 01 completed; external network access from the Workbench.

### `05-reference`

A markdown-only reference notebook. Covers file formats you'll see across the platform (FASTQ, FASTA, VCF, BAM, GFF, BED), tool concepts (Nextflow, nf-core, GCP Batch), samplesheet conventions, and links out to canonical documentation. No code cells to run; open it, read what you need, keep it in a tab as you work.

**Prereqs:** none.

### `06-launch-tostadas`

Runs CDC's `tostadas` pipeline (the `feature/measles-vadr` branch, forked and patched for GCP Batch compatibility) to package an assembled consensus genome into a submission bundle for NCBI GenBank. Uses VADR for viral annotation and `table2asn` for the final `.sqn` submission file.

> Ships with three run modes: (1) dry-run on Glen's pre-loaded measles demo data, (2) dry-run on your own data, and (3) real submission to NCBI. Modes 1 and 2 require no NCBI credentials and produce no upstream artifacts. Mode 3 posts to NCBI's production endpoints. Read the un-comment checklist in the notebook before enabling it.

Reviewer: > (1) dry-run on Glen's pre-loaded measles demo data

Is that demo data available in any project? If so, then maybe just drop the "Glen's" (I don't think every user will know who Glen is 😅). If not, then their might be some instructions needed how to get the demo data?

Author: Dropped, now reads "a small measles demo dataset". Instructions on where the data comes from will live on the tostadas pipeline tutorial page when I write it (later PR).

**Prereqs:** nb 01 completed; consensus FASTA + metadata XLSX in a GCS bucket; NCBI account only for Mode 3.

### `07-launch-basespace-copy`

Copies FASTQ files from Illumina BaseSpace into an APGAP ingest bucket. From the ingest bucket, an APGAP-managed compliance cascade (DLP scan → SRA human-read scrubber) routes the files to your lab's analytical-dataset bucket. This notebook uses local Python + the `bs` CLI + `gsutil`; there is also a parallel Seqera Platform launch path that runs the same copy through a Nextflow pipeline.

**Prereqs:** nb 01 completed; Illumina BaseSpace account with project access; a batch-upload endpoint created via the APGAP Portal.

## Where to find the source

> All seven notebooks live in the public repository at [`azpathogens/apgap-notebooks`](https://github.com/azpathogens/apgap-notebooks). The copy on your Workbench is a clone that stays in sync with `main`. If you find a bug or have a suggestion, file an issue there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All seven notebooks live in the public repository at [`azpathogens/apgap-notebooks`](https://github.com/azpathogens/apgap-notebooks). The copy on your Workbench is a clone of that repository with the `main` branch checked out. If there are notebook updates you can retrieve them via `git pull`. If you find a bug or have a suggestion, file an issue in the repository.
```
I don't think we have any scripts that pull the latest version on VM startup (or am I wrong?), so the repository wouldn't sync automatically.

Author: Rewrote using your suggestion verbatim. I'd assumed there was auto-sync via the post-startup script but hadn't verified. I'll check what install_r.sh actually does and add specifics to the notebook 03 and 06 tutorial pages if the auto-pull is real.
